CartoDB is an Open Source web mapping framework that provides geo-temporal data storage on a cloud database as well as an API for data manipulation and different styling options to display these data on a web browser. Out of the several tools considered to improve the data analysis work in this project, CartoDB proved to be the most adequate. We considered several key factors:

- Data storage: Due to the very large amount of data (>20TB?) as well as considerations on data security issues and data storage contraints imposed by the data owners, the freely available online CartoDB alternative was discarded in favour of installing manually a full CartoDB stack locally at University College London, following instructions found in http://cartodb.readthedocs.org/en/latest/install.html. This way, we could adapt the default CartoDB configuration to store larger amounts of data, allow longer ingestion times and give access to the data only to the project's researchers. 

- Utils for data ingestion: Data can be ingested into CartoDB in different formats. For this project, the input AIS data was prepared in a set of CSV files, compatible with CartoDB. The polygons describing the ECAs were saved in Shapefiles using QGIS (Section 3.2.2). CartoDB's ingestion tools will automatically recognise those fields in the input AIS and ECA files that can be georeferenced and therefore used to index the data and enable their visualization on a map.

- Ease of adoption by the research team: The AIS and ECAs data is currenty stored in our local installation of CartoDB's PostGIS database, a spatially-enabled extension for Postgres, which enables many features useful for the geo-spatial AIS data analysis carried on in this project, such as calculating distances, determining if a point is inside an area, creating buffer areas around polygons, etc. Researchers in this project were already familiar with PostGIS which made transition to CartoDB easier. The visualization and styling options are presented in a user friendly manner.

- Deployment: This is the most challenging aspect of choosing CartoDB, since when we started this work CartoDB's Open Source repository and installation guide was still in a rather experiemental stage. Fortunately it has become more stable recently. CartoDB is formed by several different components, each of them having its own installation requirements. However, there is a very active group of developers and contributors that can provide support. CartoDB's back-end is formed by a PostGIS database, along with CartoDB's SQL API, CartoDB's mapping API based on Windshaft, and a Redis data store for configuration and caching. NodeJS and Ruby On Rails serve these components. The front-end (https://github.com/CartoDB/cartodb.git) has been fully developed by CartoDB's team and is available on GitHub along with the SQL and mapping APIs, and an extension for Postgres(See https://github.com/CartoDB). 

- Data visualization capability: CartoDB's intutitive user interface displays data layered on top of a base map. It offers different tools for styling data, including category maps, choropleth, density and clustering. Beyond that, CartoDB also provides a feature called Torque that allows animation of point data over time. This is a very valuable feature for this project due to the geo-temporal nature of the AIS dataset as it ease the identification of trends.

- Integration with other visualization tools: The out-of-the-box CartoDB install offers only histogram plots. However, the options are potentially very numerous, since CartoDB's data can be exported to GeoJSON format to be used elsewhere. CartoDB's SQL API can be well integratewith JavaScript libraries such as D3 or ChartJS. 
